CHAPTER VI.
MENA MURRAY'S JOURNAL
24th July. Whitby. Lucy met me at the station, looking sweeter and lovelier than ever, and
we drove up to the house at the crescent in which they have rooms. This is a lovely place.
The little river, the Esk, runs through a deep valley, which broadens out as it comes
near the harbor. A great viaduct runs across, with high piers, through which the view seems
away than it really is. The valley is beautifully green, and it is so steep that when you are
on the high land on either side you look right across it, unless you are near enough to see
down. The houses of the old town, the sight away from us, are all red-roofed, and seem
piled up one over the other anyhow, like the pictures we see of Nuremberg. Right over the
town is the ruin of Whitby Abbey, which was sacked by the Danes, and which is the scene
of part of Marmion, where the girl was built up, in the wall. It is a most noble ruin,
of immense size, and full of beautiful and romantic bits. There is a legend that a white
lady is seen in one of the windows. Between it and the town there is another church, the
parish one, round which is a big graveyard, all full of tombstones. This is, to my mind,
the nicest spot in Whitby, for it lies right over the town, and has a full view of the
harbour, and all up the bay to where the headland called Kettleness stretches out into the sea.
It descends so steeply over the harbour that part of the bank has fallen away, and some
of the graves have been destroyed. In one place part of the stonework of the graves
stretches out over the sandy pathway far below. There are walks with seats beside them through
the churchyard, and people go and sit there all day long, looking at the beautiful view
and enjoying the breeze. I shall come and sit here often myself in work. Indeed, I am
writing now, with my book on my knee, and listening to the talk of three old men who
are sitting beside me. They seem to do nothing all day but sit here and talk.
The harbour lies below me, with on the far side one long granite wall stretching out
into the sea, with a curve outwards at the end of it, in the middle of which is a lighthouse.
A heavy seawall runs along outside of it. On the near side the seawall makes an elbow
crooked inversely, and its end too has a lighthouse. Between the two piers there is a narrow opening
into the harbour, which then suddenly widens. It is nice at high water, but when the tide
is out it shoals away to nothing, and there is merely the stream of the esk running between
banks of sand with rocks here and there. Outside the harbour, on this side, there rises for
about half a mile a great reef, the sharp of which runs straight out from behind the
south lighthouse. At the end of it is a buoy with a bell, which swings in bad weather and
sends in a mournful sound on the wind. They have a legend here that when a ship is lost
bells are heard out at sea. I must ask the old man about this. He is coming this way.
He is a funny old man. He must be awfully old, for his face is gnarled and twisted like
the bark of a tree. He tells me that he is nearly a hundred, and that he was a sailor
in the Greenland fishing fleet when Waterloo was fought. He is, I am afraid, a very sceptical
person, for when I asked him about the bells at sea and the white lady at the abbey he
said very brusquely, I wouldn't fash myself about them, miss. Them things we all wore
out. Mind, I don't say that they never was, but I do say that they wasn't in my time.
They be all very well for comers and trippers and the like, but not for a nice young lady
like you. Them fit folks from York and Leeds that be always eatin' curd herons and drinkin'
tea and lookin' out to buy cheap jut with creed art. I wonder myself who'll be bothered
tellin' lies to them, even the newspapers, which is full of fool talk.
I thought he would be a good person to learn interesting things from, so I asked him if
he would mind telling me something about the whale fishing in the old days. He was just
settling himself to begin when the clock struck six, whereupon he laboured to get up and
said,
I must be gang a greenwoods home now, miss. My grand-daughter doesn't like to be kept
waitin' when the tea is ready, for it takes me time to cramble a boon the grease, for
there be many of them, and miss a lack barely timbersairly by the clock.
He hobbled away, and I could see him hurrying as well as he could down the steps. The steps
are a great feature on the place. They lead from the town to the church. There are hundreds
of them—I do not know how many—and they wind up in a delicate curve. The slope is
so gentle that a horse could easily walk up and down them. I think they must originally
have had something to do with the abbey.
I shall go home too. Lucy went out, visiting with her mother, and as they were only duty
calls I did not go.
First of August. I came up here an hour ago with Lucy, and we had a most interesting talk
with my old friend and the two others who always come and join him. He is evidently
the Sir Oracle of them, and I should think must have been in his time a most dictatorial
person. He would not admit anything and down faces everybody. If he can't out argue them
he bullies them and then takes their silence for agreement with his views.
Lucy was looking sweetly pretty in her white lawn frock. She has got a beautiful color
since she has been here.
I noticed that the old men did not lose any time in coming and sitting near her when we
sat down. She is so sweet with old people. I think they all fell in love with her on
spot. Even my old man succumbed and did not contradict her, but gave me double share instead.
I got him on the subject of the legends, and he went off at once into a sort of sermon.
I must try to remember it and put it down.
It be all fool talk, luck, stock and metal, that's what it be and not else. These bans
and laughs and bull-ghosts and bar-gasts and a-beldering, they be not but air-blibs. They
not grins and signs and warnings, be all invented by partisans and ill-some berk-botties and
railway-tartas to scare and scorn our halflings and to get folks to do something that they
don't other incline to. It makes me ireful to think of them. Why, it's them that, not
content with printing lies on paper and preaching them out of pulpits, does want to be cutting
them on the tombstones. Look here, all around you, in that air-three-well. All them stains
holding up their heads as well as the kind out of their pride is a kind simply tumbling
down with the weight of the lies wrote on them. Here lies the body, or sacred to the
memory wrote on all of them, and yet in thy half of them there beeth no bodies at all,
and the memories of them beeth care to pinch your snuff about, much less sacred. Lies all
of them, nothing but lies of one kind or another. My god, but it be a queer scoundrelment at
the day of judgment when they come tumbling up in their death-socks, all drooped together,
and trying to drag their tomb-stains with them to prove how good they was, some of them
trembling and dithering, with their hands dozened and slippery from lying in the sea
that they can't even keep their gurp of them.
I could see from the old fellow's self-satisfied air, and the way in which he looked round
for the approval of his cronies that he was showing off, so I put in a word to keep him
Oh, Mr. Swales, you can't be serious. Certainly these tomb-stones are not all wrong. Gablons,
there may be a poorest few not wrong, save in where they make out the people too good,
for there be folk that do think a bonbon be like the sea, if only it be their own. The
whole thing be only lies. Now look you here, you come here to a stranger, and you see this
kick goth.
I nodded, for I thought it better to assent, though I did not quite understand his dialect.
I knew it had something to do with the church.
He went on,
And you can say it that all this stands be a boon folk that be a hept here, snort and
snog.
I assented again.
Then that be just where the lie comes in. Why, there be scores of these lay-beds that
be true as old Dunn's back-a-box on Friday night. He nudged one of his companions, and
they all laughed. And, my God, how could there be otherwise? Look at that one, the athas
above the beer-bank. Read it.
I went over and read,
Edward Spence-la, master mariner, murdered by pirates off the coast of Andres, April
1854, age thirty. When I came back, Mr. Swills went on,
Who brought him home, I wonder, to hap him here? Murdered off the coast of Andres, and
you consented his body lay under. Why, I could name me a dozen whose bones lie in the Greenland
He pointed northwards, or where the currents may have drifted them. There be the stains
around ye. You can't with your young eyes read the small print of the lies from here.
This breath-wet Lowry, I knew his father, lost in the lively off Greenland in twenty.
Or Andrew Woodhouse, drowned in the same seas in 1777. Or John Paxton, drowned off Cape
farewell a year later, or old John Rowlings, whose grandfather sailed with me, drowned
in the Gulf of Finland in fifty. Do ye think that all these men will have to make a rush
to Whitby when the trumpet sounds? I have me anthems about it. I tell ye that when they
got here they be jumbling and jostling one another, the way that it would be like a fight
upon the ice in the old days, when we be at one another from daylight to dark, and trying
to tie up our cuts by the Arura Borealis. This was evidently local pleasantry, for the
old man cackled over it, and his cronies joined in with gusto.
But, I said, surely you are not quite correct, for you start on the assumption that all the
poor people or their spirits will have to take their tombstones with them on the day
of judgment. Do you think that that will be really necessary?
Well what else be the tombstones for? Answer me that, miss.
To please their relatives, I suppose.
To please their relatives, you suppose? This he said with intense scorn. How will it pleasure
their relatives to know that lies are wrote over them, and that everybody in the place
know that they be lies?
He pointed to a stone at our feet, which had been laid down as a slab, on which the seat
was rested, close to the edge of the cliff. Read the lies on that thrift-stone, he said.
The letters were upside down to me from where I sat, but Lucy was more opposite to them,
so she leant over and read—
Sacred to the memory of George Cannon, who died in the hope of glorious resurrection,
on July 20, 1873, falling from the rocks at Kettles. This tomb was erected by his sorrowing
mother to her dearly beloved son. He was the only son of his mother, and she was a widow.
Really, Mr. Swales, I don't see anything very funny in that."
She spoke her comment very gravely and somewhat severely.
"'You don't see aunt funny, ha-ha! But that's because your grand-a-sarnin' mother was a
hell-cat that hated him because he was a crooked, a regular lammeter he was, and he hated her
so that he committed suicide in order that she mightn't get an insurance she put on his
life. Blew neither top of his head off with an old musket that they had for scaring crows
with. Point for crows then, for it brought the clags and the dowps to him. That's the
way he fell off the rocks. And as to hopes of a glorious resurrection, I've often heard
him say myself that he hoped he'd go to hell, for his mother was so fierce that she'd be
sure to go to heaven, and he didn't want to idle where she was. Isn't that stunning at
any rate he hammered it with his stick as he spoke? Apocalypse! And won't it make Gabriel
when Geordi comes pantonutris with the tomb-stand balanced on his hump and asked to be took
as evidence?'
I did not know what to say, but Lucy turned the conversation as she said, rising up,
"'Oh, why did you tell us of this? It is my favorite seat, and I cannot leave it, and
now I find I must go on sitting over the grave of a suicide.'
"'That won't harm you, my pretty, and it may make poor Geordi gladsome to have so trim a
sitting on his lap. Ah, that won't hurt you. Why, I've sat here off and on for nigh twenty
years past, and it hasn't done me no harm. Don't you fash about them as lies unto ye,
or they doesn't lie there either. It'll be time for you to be getting scat when you see
the tomb-stains all run away with, and the place is bare as a stubble field.'
"'Ah, there's the clock, and I must go. I can serve as tea, ladies.' And off he hobbled.'
Lucy and I sat awhile, and it was all so beautiful before us that we took hands as we sat, and
she told me all over again about Arthur and their coming marriage. That made me just a
little heartsick, for I haven't heard from Jonathan for a whole month.
"'The same day. I came up here alone, for I am very sad. There was no letter for me.
I hope there cannot be anything the matter with Jonathan. The clock has just struck nine.
I see the lights scattered all over the town, sometimes in rows where the streets are, and
sometimes singly. They run right up the esk and die away in the curve of the valley. To
my left the view is cut off by a black line of roof of the old house next to the abbey.
The sheep and lambs are bleating in the fields away behind me, and there is a clatter of
donkeys' hooves up the paved road below. The band on the pier is playing a harsh waltz
in good time, and farther along the quay there is a Salvation Army meeting in the back street.
Neither of the bands hears the other, but up here I hear and see them both. I wonder
where Jonathan is, and if he is thinking of me. Oh, I wish he were here.'
5 June.
The case of Renfield grows more interesting the more I get to understand the man. He has
certain qualities very largely developed—selfishness, secrecy, and purpose. I wish I could get at
what is the object of the latter. He seems to have some settled scheme of his own, but
what it is I do not know. His redeeming quality is a love of animals, though, indeed, he has
such curious turns in it that I sometimes imagine he is only abnormally cruel. His pets
are of odd sorts. Just now his hobby is catching flies. He has at present such a quantity that
I have had myself to expostulate. To my astonishment he did not break out into a fury, as I expected,
but took the matter in simple seriousness. He thought for a moment and then said,
"'May I have three days? I shall clear them away.' Of course I said that would do. I must
watch him.'
18 June.
He has turned his mind now to spiders, and has got several very big fellows in a box.
He keeps feeding them his flies, and the number of the latter is becoming sensibly diminished,
although he has used half his food in attracting more flies from outside to his room.
1 July.
His spiders are now becoming as great a nuisance as his flies, and today I told him that he
must get rid of them. He looked very sad at this, so I said that he must, some of them,
at all events. He cheerfully acquiesced in this, and I gave him the same time as before
for reduction. He disgusted me much while with him, for when a hoarded blow-fly, bloated
with some carrion food, buzzed into the room, he caught it, held it exultantly for a few
moments between his finger and thumb, and before I knew what he was going to do, put
it in his mouth and ate it. I scolded him for it, but he argued quietly that it was
very good and very wholesome, that it was life, strong life, and gave life to him. This
gave me an idea, or the rudiment of one. I must watch how he gets rid of his spiders.
He has evidently some deep problem in his mind, for he keeps a little notebook in which
he is always jotting down something. Whole pages of it are filled with masses of figures,
generally single numbers added up in batches, and then the totals added in batches again,
as though he were focusing some account, as the auditors put it.
8 July.
There is a method in his madness, and the rudimentary idea in my mind is growing. It
will be a whole idea soon, and then, oh unconscious cerebration, you will have to give the wall
to your conscious brother. I kept away from my friend for a few days so that I might notice
if there were any change. Things remain as they were, except that he has parted with
some of his pets and got a new one. He has managed to get a sparrow, and has already
partially tamed it. His means of taming is simple, for already the spiders have diminished.
Those that do remain, however, are well fed, for he still brings in the flies by tempting
them with his food.
19 July.
We are progressing. My friend has now a whole colony of sparrows, and his flies and spiders
are almost obliterated. When I came in, he ran to me and said he wanted to ask me a great
favor, a very, very great favor, and as he spoke, he fawned on me like a dog. I asked
him what it was, and he said, with a sort of rapture in his voice and bearing, a kitten,
a nice little sleek, playful kitten, that I can play with and teach and feed and feed
and feed. I was not unprepared for this request, for I had noticed how his pets went on increasing
in size and vivacity, but I did not care that his pretty family of tamed sparrows should
be wiped out in the same manner as the flies and spiders. So I said I would see about it,
and asked him if he would not rather have a cat than a kitten. His eagerness betrayed
him as he answered, Oh, yes, I would like a cat. I only asked for a kitten lest you
should refuse me a cat. No one would refuse me a kitten, would they? I shook my head,
and said that at present I feared it would not be possible, but that I would see about
it. His face fell, and I could see a warning of danger in it, for there was a sudden fierce
sidelong look which meant killing. The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall
test him with his present craving and see how it will work out, and then I shall know
more.
10 p.m. I visited him again and found him sitting in a corner brooding. When I came
again he threw himself on his knees before me and implored me to let him have a cat that
his salvation depended upon it. I was firm, however, and told him that he could not have
it, whereupon he went without a word and sat down gnawing his fingers in the corner where
I had found him. I shall see him in the morning early.
20 j. Visited Renfield very early before attendant went his rounds. Found him up and humming
a tune. He was spreading out his sugar, which he had saved, in the window, and was manifestly
beginning his fly-catching again, and beginning it cheerfully and with a good grace. I looked
around for his birds, and not seeing them, asked him where they were. He replied without
turning round that they had all flown away. There were a few feathers about the room,
and on his pillow a drop of blood. I said nothing, but went and told the keeper to report
to me if there were anything odd about him during the day.
11 a.m. The attendant has just been to see me to say that Renfield has been very sick
and has disgorged a whole lot of feathers. My belief is, doctor, he said, that he has
eaten his birds and that he just took and ate them raw.
11 p.m. I gave Renfield a strong opiate tonight, enough to make even him sleep, and took away
his pocket-book to look at it. The thought that has been buzzing about my brain lately
is complete, and the theory proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. I shall have
to invent a new classification for him and call him a Zufagous Life-Eating Maniac.
What he desires is to absorb as many lives as he can, and he has laid himself out to
achieve it in a cumulative way. He gave many flies to one spider, and many spiders to one
bird, and then wanted a cat to eat the many birds. What would have been his later steps?
It would almost be worthwhile to complete the experiment. It might be done if there
were only a sufficient cause. Men sneered at vivisection, and yet look at its results
today. Why not advance science in its most difficult and vital aspect, the knowledge
of the brain? Had I even the secret of one such mind, did I hold the key to the fancy
of even one lunatic, I might advance my own branch of science to a pitch compared with
which Burton Sanderson's physiology, or Faraday's brain knowledge, would be as nothing. If only
there were a sufficient cause, I must not think too much of this, or I may be tempted.
A good cause might turn the scale with me, for may not I too be of an exceptional brain
congenitally? How well the man reasoned. Lunatics always do within their own scope.
I wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one. He has closed the account
most accurately, and today begun a new record. How many of us begin a new record with each
day of our lives? To me it seems only yesterday that my whole life ended with my new hope,
and that truly I began a new record. So it shall be until the great recorder sums me
up and closes my ledger account with a balance to profit or loss.
Ah, Lucy, Lucy, I cannot be angry with you, nor can I be angry with my friend whose happiness
is yours, but I must only wait on hopeless and work, work, work. If I could have as strong
a cause as my poor mad friend there, a good unselfish cause to make me work, that would
be indeed happiness.
Mina Murray's Journal
26th of July. I am anxious and it soothes me to express myself here. It is like whispering
to oneself and listening at the same time. And there is also something about the shorthand
symbols that makes it different from writing.
I am unhappy about Lucy and about Jonathan. I had not heard from Jonathan for some time
and was very concerned, but yesterday dear Mr. Hawkins, who is always so kind, sent me
a letter from him. I had written asking him if he had heard, and he said the enclosed
had just been received. It is only a line dated from Castle Dracula and says that he
is just starting for home. That is not like Jonathan. I do not understand it and it makes
me uneasy.
Then too Lucy, although she is so well, has lately taken to her old habit of walking in
her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and we have decided that I am to lock
the door of our room every night. Mrs. Westlenra has got an idea that sleepwalkers always go
out on roofs of houses and along the edges of cliffs and then get suddenly wakened and
fall over with a despairing cry that echoes all over the place. Poor dear! She is naturally
anxious about Lucy and she tells me that her husband, Lucy's father, had the same habit,
that he would get up in the night and dress himself and go out if he were not stopped.
Lucy is to be married in the autumn, and she is already planning out her dresses and how
house is to be arranged. I sympathize with her, for I do the same. Only Jonathan and
I will start in life in a very simple way, and shall have to try to make both ends meet.
Mr. Homewood, he is the honorable Arthur Homewood, only son of Lord Godalming, is coming up here
very shortly, as soon as he can leave town, for his father is not very well, and I think
dear Lucy is counting the moments till he comes. She wants to take him up in the seat
of the churchyard cliff and show him the beauty of Whitby. I dare say it is the waiting which
disturbs her. She will be all right when he arrives.
27th of July. No news from Jonathan. I am getting quite uneasy about him, though why
I should I do not know, but I do wish that he would write, if it were only a single line.
Lucy walks more than ever, and each night I am awakened by her moving about the room.
Fortunately, the weather is so hot that she cannot get cold. But still, the anxiety and
the perpetually being awakened is beginning to tell on me, and I am getting nervous and
wakeful myself. Thank God Lucy's health keeps up. Mr. Homewood has been suddenly called
to ring to see his father, who has been taken seriously ill. Lucy frets at the postponement
of seeing him, but it does not touch her looks. She is a trifle stouter, and her cheeks are
lovely rose pink. She has lost the anemic look which she had. I pray it will all last.
3rd of August. Another week gone by, and no news from Jonathan. Not even to Mr. Hawkins,
from whom I have heard. Oh, I do hope he is not ill. He surely would have written. I look
at that last letter of his, but somehow it does not satisfy me. It does not read like
him, and yet it is his writing. There is no mistake of that.
Lucy has not walked much in her sleep the last week, but there is an odd concentration
about her which I do not understand. Even in her sleep she seems to be watching me.
She tries the door, and finding it locked, goes about the room, searching for the key.
6th of August. Another three days, and no news. The suspense is getting dreadful. If
I only knew where to write to or where to go to, I should feel easier. But no one has
heard a word of Jonathan since that last letter. I must only pray to God for patience.
Lucy is more excitable than ever, but is otherwise well. Last night was very threatening, and
the fishermen say that we are in for a storm. I must try to watch it, and learn the weather
signs.
Today is a gray day, and the sun as I write is hidden in thick clouds high over Kettleness.
Everything is gray, except the green grass which seems like emerald amongst it, gray
earthy rock, gray clouds, tinged with a sunburst at the far edge, hang over the gray sea in
which the sand points stretch like gray figures. The sea is tumbling in over the shallows in
the sandy flats with a roar, muffled in sea mists drifting inland. The horizon is lost
in a gray mist. All vastness, the clouds are piled up like giant rocks, and there is a
brule over the sea that sounds like some passage of doom. Dark figures are on the beach here
and there, sometimes half-shrouded in the mist, and seem men-like trees walking. The fishing boats are racing for home, and rise and dip in the ground swell as they sweep into the harbor, bending to the scuppers. Here comes old Mr. Swales. He is making straight for me, and I can see by the way he lifts his hat that he wants to talk. I have been quite touched by the change in the poor old man. When he sat down beside me, he said in a very gentle way, I want to say something to you, miss.
I could see that he was not at ease, so I took his poor old wrinkled hand in mine and asked him to speak fully. So he said, leaving his hand in mine, I am afraid, my dearie, that I must have shocked you by all the wicked things I have been saying about the dead and such-like for weeks past, but I didn't mean them, and I want you to remember that when I am gone. We old folks that be daffled, with one foot above the crock-hole, don't all together like to think of it, and we don't want to feel scared of it, and that's why I took to making light
of it, so that I would cheer up my own heart a bit. But, Lord, love you, miss, I ain't afraid of dying, not a bit, only I don't want to die if I can help it. My time must be nigh at hand now, for I be old, and a hundred years is too much for any man to expect. And I am so nigh at that the old man has already witnessed life. You see, I can't get out of the habit of coughing about it all at once. The chaffs will wag as they be used to.
Ah, some day soon the angel of death will sound his trumpet for me. But don't you dull and grate, my dearie, for he saw that I was crying. If he should come this very night, I'd not refuse to answer his call. For life be after all, only awaiting for something else than what we're doing, and death be all that we can rightly depend on.
But I'm content, for it's coming to me, my dearie, and coming quick. It may be coming while we be looking and wondering. Maybe it's in that wind out over the sea that's pringing with it loss and wreck and sore distress and sad hearts.
Look, look! he cried suddenly. There's something in that wind and in the host beyond that sound, and looks and tastes and smells like death.
It's in the air. I feel it coming.
Ah, Lord, make me answer cheerful when my call comes.
He held up his arms devoutly and raised his hat. His mouth moved as though he were praying.
After a few minutes' silence he got up, shook hands with me, and blessed me, and said good-bye, and hobbled off. It all touched me and upset me very much.
I was glad when the Coast Guard came along with his spy-glass under his arm. He stopped to talk with me, as he always does, but all the time kept looking at a strange ship.
I can't make her out, he said.
She's a Russian by the look of her. Ah, but she's knocking about in the queerest way.
She doesn't know her mind a bit. She seems to see the storm coming, but can't decide whether to run up north in the open or to put in here.
Look there again. She's steered mighty strangely, for she doesn't mind the hand on the wheel, changes about with every puff of wind.
Ah, we'll hear more of her before this time tomorrow.